feat(timeline): initial design guidance (#29)
vmware-clarity/clarity-guidance: 1036-timeline-design-guidance.md

---
category: component design guidance
state: draft
created: 2024-10-17
updated: 2024-10-21
---

# Timeline Component

> The [Timeline](https://clarity.design/documentation/timeline) component is a visual indicator that shows progress through a workflow. It can also guide the user through specific processes or pre-defined steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [timeline](https://clarity.design/documentation/timeline) component is a visual indicator that shows progress through a workflow. It can also guide the user through specific processes or pre-defined steps.
```

> The [timeline](https://clarity.design/documentation/timeline) component is a visual indicator that shows progress through a workflow. It can also guide the user through specific processes or pre-defined steps.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The timeline component is a visual indicator that displays progress through a workflow. It can also guide users through specific processes or predefined steps, helping them understand their journey.
```

Reviewer: We should keep the `[timeline](https://clarity.design/documentation/timeline)` link.

## Guidance

### Timeline Usage

> - **Must** use a timeline when you need to showcase a list of events that are relevant to the user in chronological order.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** use a timeline when showcasing a list of events that are relevant to the user in chronological order to increase user awareness of the sequence of events.
```

> - **Must** use a timeline when you need to break down a complex and long work processes into multiple concrete steps (more than two steps).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **May** use a timeline when you need to break down a complex and long work processes into multiple concrete steps (more than two steps).
```

This one is a "may" because the wizard and stepper exist as alternatives.

- **Must** use a timeline when you need to showcase a list of events that are relevant to the user in chronological order.

> - **Must** use a timeline when users need to have an overview of a workflow, and where they are in the process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Must** use a timeline when users need to have an overview of a workflow and where they are in the process.
```

> - **Must** use a timeline when you need more space for longer forms with a fewer number of steps. For many steps with small data set in each step use [stepper](https://clarity.design/documentation/stepper).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** use a timeline when longer forms require more space and have fewer steps. For workflows with many steps that contain small amounts of data in each step, use a [stepper](https://clarity.design/documentation/stepper).
```

> - **Must** use a timeline when you need more space for longer forms with a fewer number of steps. For many steps with small data set in each step use [Stepper](https://clarity.design/documentation/stepper).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Must** use a timeline when you need more space for longer forms with a fewer number of steps. For many steps with small data set in each step, use [stepper](https://clarity.design/documentation/stepper).
```

> - **May** use a timeline when you need to break down a complex and long work processes into multiple concrete steps (more than two steps).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **may** use a timeline when breaking down complex and lengthy workflows into multiple clear steps (more than two steps) to help users follow the process more easily.
```

For more guidance on multi-step process workflows, see the [Multi-Step Workflow Pattern](https://clarity.design/documentation/multi-step-workflow).

### Timeline Layouts

> There are two types of layouts, `horizontal` and `vertical`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two types of layouts: horizontal and vertical.
```

Inline code isn't necessary for this. This is not code documentation. Please update all.

> There are two types of layouts: horizontal and vertical.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Timelines have two types of layouts: horizontal and vertical.
```

- **Must** use a horizontal layout when a workflow has three to five steps.

> - **Must** use a horizontal layout when all steps can be displayed without wrapping.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** use a horizontal layout when all steps can be displayed without wrapping to maintain a clear and organized visual flow.
```

> - **Must** use a vertical layout when a workflow has more than five steps.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** use a vertical layout when a workflow has more than five steps to ensure clarity and prevent overwhelming users with too much information at once.
```

> - **Must** use a `vertical` layout when timestamps are optional.

Reviewer: Why can't a horizontal timeline be used without timestamps? We have examples of this on the clarity.design website.

Author: This is a statement available in the clarity.design website for vertical layout: "Used when timestamps are optional".
Changed it to "May" so it doesn't imply that a horizontal timeline can't be used without timestamps.
or we could just take off this point from here.

Reviewer: I will defer to @jbusta5.

### Timeline States

> - Each step in a timeline **must** have one of five visual states: complete, current step, not started, processing and error.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** ensure each step in a timeline has one of five visual states: complete, current step, not started, processing, or error, to clearly indicate progress and status to users.
```

> - Each step in a timeline **must** have one of five visual states: `Step complete`, `Current step`, `Not started`, `Processing` and `Error`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Each step in a timeline **must** have one of five visual states: complete, current step, not started, processing, and error.
```

These should not be styled as inline code because those are not code identifiers or symbols.

> - **Must** use a spinner when loading or taking action (i.e in the processing state).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** use a spinner when loading or performing an action (e.g., in the processing state) to provide users with visual feedback and indicate that their request is being processed.
```

> - **Must** use a spinner when loading or taking action i.e in the `Processing` state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Must** use a spinner when loading or taking action (i.e in the processing state).
```

> - **Must** disable buttons when loading or make buttons contextual for the loading state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** disable buttons when loading or adjust buttons to reflect the contextual loading state, ensuring users understand that actions cannot be taken during this time.
```

> - **Should** display the error message under the error icon if needed in the error state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** display the error message under the error icon in the error state to provide users with clear information about the issue.
```

> - **Should** display the error message under the error icon if needed in the `Error` state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Should** display the error message under the error icon if needed in the error state.
```

> - **Should not** use tooltips to display error messages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must not** use tooltips to display error messages, as this can hinder accessibility for users who rely on screen readers or keyboard navigation. Instead, error messages should be displayed visibly within the interface to ensure all users can access and understand the information.
```

> - **Should** NOT use tooltips to display error messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Should not** use tooltips to display error messages.
```

### Timeline Step

> - **Should** use a step description to provide additional information and guidance to the user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** use a step description to provide additional information and guidance to users, helping them understand what is required at each stage of the process.
```
